---
date: 2014-09-25
title: Bad big data
description: |
  Just because it's data doesn't make it right. But even when all the available data is flawed, we can get closer to the truth with mathematical reasoning and the wisdom of making comparisons.
---

In the [previous class](/2014-09-23), we looked at a scenario in which there was effectively zero data, and how investigative reporters used an indirectly related, but plentiful and reilable dataset, to make a convincing case.

The scenario we cover today has seemingly enough data. But the data itself, at nearly every level, is inherently vulnerable to inconsistent counting, if not outright manipulation.

At the same time, having the ability and foresight to confront those numbers on their own terms, Justin TK of the Balitmore Sun demonstrates how to find truth in something as controversial and infuriatingly opague as rape statistics.

-----------------

- The big number in 2009: violent crime rate
- How does that compare year over year?
- How does that violent crime break down?
- Look at murders vs rapes: two types of crime, 10 year span, one city
- Now go broader: murder vs rape vs other cities
- Now go focused: number of unfounded rapes in 2009
- Now widen the look: number of unfounded reports


### Why just rapes?

Rapes are by their nature crimes in which level of policing, demographics, etc., have limited effect...since most rapes are   new neighborhood patrol policy would have less effect on rapes than they would on murders.



For every report of a crime there may be as many as 3 points of contact, i.e. offical records generated:

1. When an emergency operator responds to 911
2. When a police officer responds to the scene
3. When a detective is assigned to investigate the case, after which it may be brought to trial.


Crime happens, no one reports it
Crime happens, police officer takes the call, files a report, detective investigates
Crime happens, police officer takes the call, files a report, detective investigates and finds u
Police finds cause, Detective believes it's a case (TK)

Reporting rape form: http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/recent-program-updates/reporting-rape-in-2013

- If reported rapes decrease, perhaps all crime is decreasing?
- If homicide rate remains the same, perhaps there is no relation between homicides and rapes. perhaps something fundamental happened in AMerican society in which rape culture dropped.
- If no other cities show that kind of drop in just rapes, then...number of reports/calls for helps have decreased, and we don't know why.
- If the number of calls for help have not changed. Then, our department has just become better (better than anyone else) at choosing between unfounded and founded cases.


Then, what now?

A: Turns out a lot of calls for help do not have records.
B: At least one detective is clearing a lot of unfounded cases...if it were the case that the police department is better at discerning cases, why is it just one detective who is catching all the fake reports?


--- Impact:

Notice how fast things turned around

50% rise in crime.

-----

Uber case.





-------------

### DUI sheet

Big picture. We want to emulate a graph. But we need to get the data in the right form. In fact, most of your difficult visualization work will be to get data in the right form for whatever chart-making tool you're using.

We start out with a spreadsheet with every DUI report in the San Francisco crime incident database. Every report has its own row, and we may be able to count the total number of incidents (by counting up all the rows), but we can't figure out how many incidents there are by, say, per month and year:

IMG

We need a thing that looks like this: A row for every __month-year__ combination, and a column that __counts__ number of incidents that have that __month-year__

IMG

And then we can chart it.

As an exercise, let's first chart the rate of DUIs by __hour__.

1. Open [Google spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/a/stanford.edu/spreadsheets/d/1oUXIEc0Qxev34Lwt0Ocea_lCwRqcRCw4wWNz4elw4uc/edit#gid=0)
2. Make a copy
3. Add some frozen panes, stretch out some fields
4. Add a column named `hour`
5. Add the formula `=HOUR(E2)` (assuming `E` is the `time` column) and calculate the formula down all the rows.
 
   IMG
6. Now make a __Pivot Table__
7. For the __Rows__ editor, we want to __Group by: hour__ (you can uncheck the __Show totals__ box, too)

   IMG
8. Remember that we want to know _how many DUIs were reporter per hour_; in other words, the kind of summary we want is a *count of the rows*. So in the __Values__ section, it doesn't matter what column you pick out. But for consistencies' sake, just pick `incidntnum`.

9. By default, the pivot table will try to __Display__ the __SUM__ of the incident numbers...which makes no sense for what we want to do. Change the __Display__ option to __COUNT__

   IMG






